the Red Sea is one of the busiest
shipping lanes in the world but now
hoofy fighters from Yemen are attacking
vessels forcing major companies to
reroute operations how will this impact
global trade and what can be done to
secure the Red Sea this is Inside
Story
[Music]
I'm SEL vaner welcome to the program the
ripple effect of Israel's war on Gaza is
causing a maritime crisis in the Red Sea
one that may have major implications for
the global economy and trade Iranian
backed houthis have been carrying out
attacks on Commercial vessels the
fighters say that they're targeting
ships linked to Israel in protest
against the war in Gaza as a result
several major firms have suspended
operations in their strategically
important Waterway the United States has
announced a coalition task force to
respond to the attacks but how effective
will that be and what impact will the
disruptions have on the global economy
we'll discuss all this with our guests
after this report by Victoria
Gaton commercial ships under attack by
iranian-backed houthi fighters in one of
the world's most important shipping
lanes since the war on Gaza started more
than two months ago houthis have used
missiles and drones to attack vessels
they say are supplying Israel at least
12 shipping companies including
Denmark's MK and oil giant BP have
suspended operations in the Red Sea
because of safety concerns this is not
an Israeli trade problem this is a
global trade problem um the attacks are
very very wide ranging they're taking in
ships from all different types of flag
and have potentially very very serious
consequences for Sea farers from all
around the world
the conflict is centered around a
crucial Maritime Corridor connecting
Europe and the Mediterranean to Asia 12%
of global trade passes through it
avoiding the Red Sea and taking a longer
Route Around the southern tip of Africa
increases travel time and drives up
prices the cost of the fuel um the cost
of increased insurance and the fact that
the ships and the containers are then
out of place this disruption just
escalates all of that means that the
costs for consumers are going to
increase in an effort to prevent further
attacks the US Secretary of Defense
Lloyd Austin announced the formation of
a multinational Naval task force to
patrol the Red Sea during his visit to
Israel on Monday these attacks are
Reckless dangerous and they violate
international law and so we're taking
action to uh build an International
Coalition to address this threat and I
would remind you that this is not just a
US issue
uh this is this is an international
problem and it deserves an international
uh
response the houth accus the Coalition
of militarizing the sea and say it will
not stop their Naval operations which
aim to support Palestinians in
confronting Israeli aggression all of
which risks pushing the region into
further turmoil Victoria gonb for Inside
[Music]
Story let's bring in our guests now in
Ottawa is tomuno a non-resident fellow
at the sa Center for strategic studies
in Brussels is James Moran a former EU
ambassador to Egypt Jordan and Yemen and
in Plymouth is stavos Karen peridis a
lecturer in Maritime economics at the
University of Plymouth and head of the
maritime transport research group thank
you um gentleman for joining us stavos
first question goes to you how much
damage does this do to global
trade oh okay straight to the not $1
million doll question but the one
billion doll question first of all
thanks for having me Paul here it's a
great honor to be and as we're
discussing earlier on is a it's a great
fact that we're trying to have that
coverage to a very important topic for
the global trade uh it has a big damage
you know if we go back nearly two years
ago as you may remember for the blockage
of the sus Canal back in March
2021 um from that area is on a daily
basis we have 9.5 billion of trade
passing so as you can imagine uh that is
causing a lot of impact to the overall
trade the global trade and is also
increasing the length of the journey so
it's approximately 10 extra days for for
vessels carrying the goods from Asia to
Europe and by that we're having more
costs in terms of the transportation of
the goods and of course they're going to
be more delayed so as you can imagine
that has a huge noon effective overall
Supply Chains Are you able to so that
our viewers can can get a concrete sense
of what this means for them for the
consumer this means that you can have
energy consumer goods that are stuck on
ships for an extra two weeks compared to
what was scheduled how much does that
drive up the cost of everything that's
on that ship for
instance it's kind of difficult to give
you a number now because you know like
we have to see first of all how the
freight rates are going to react we've
seen them increasing we also seen the
oil price getting a bit of increase
because of that uh I think if the
overall situation escalates and
continues like that uh then we're going
to see an increase in both both in the
oil and also because as we know nearly
50% of the operational expenditure of
the vessels is oil so if the oil goes up
the freight rat will go up by definition
and we also have to add on top the extra
Voyage time so that means that the
overall transportation of the goods is
going to be more lengthy and more more
uh delayed depending of course on the
various sectors so for instance if we're
talking about containers that is going
to increase another 10 days as we said
earlier on but the good news is that
we're ending the Christmas season so
it's going to be capacity in the system
h on the other side I think for for
Tangers that's not going to be the case
because Tangers were already uh loaded
and um that's going to push uh faster
the increase in the freight rates for
for oil so you know we have to see it on
specific segments and we I cannot give
you an aggregate number but definitely
we're going to see an increase about the
timing of this when would we expect to
actually see the difference in prices
you said because this is the Christmas
season there's capacity in the in the
markets um does that mean that what in
January or would it be February when you
start seeing the the price increase
really hit
consumers uh to to be frank you you have
to consider that if we're talking about
containers at the moment uh that means
that U you know the goods that we have
ordered for Christmas they have been
already delivered you know it's the 19th
of December it's couple of days before
Christmas so everything is kind of been
delivered so we're heading towards the
quiet season January and February is the
the quiet season so that means there is
capacity in the container sector to
absorve any kind of extra need of course
after you know um we have to think in a
lead time you know when you're placing
an order it takes nearly 35 days to come
from Asia to Europe so we have to
consider that when the trade is going to
recover after the Chinese New Year when
it's going to be around end of February
and things like that uh then the trade
start picking up again and that means
that the orders we going to place lateer
January that is going to have an knon
effect in container shipping the the one
we're going to see more obvious of
course we're going to see a small
increase in the overall Freight rate
because of the additional uh cost that
as I said for the traveling of the for
the transportation of the goods but I
think after February March we're going
to see a bigger effect if the overall
situation continues which I hope it
wouldn't okay I'm with you and that's
really interesting and it's an
interesting reminder that that due to
the nature of how this works there is by
definition a lag in between the time
when there's a disruption in the supply
chain such as what we're seeing now in
the in the um Southern Red Sea and the
moment when the the end consumers will
actually feel it um that is good to know
at the outset of this conversation TOA
what is the endgame for the houthis here
I'm getting all the big questions out of
the way at the top of the
show that's a difficult question to
answer also because the houthis are not
very transparent we don't know exactly
what it is they're trying to do but
generally speaking we can say that
there's a number of objectives that they
have one of them has got to be domestic
and and in media conversations we focus
a lot on the regional or strategic
Dimension but there's also a domestic
Dimension the houthis uh have de facto
won the Civil War in Yemen not
completely but in practice they have
they are now the deao governing
Authority in the capital in the
Northwest they control something like
60% of the population they've won and
now they are trying to move into a bit
of a post-war phase um they are in
discussions with Saudi Arabia to
formalize the Saudi withdrawal that
post-war phase will be challenging for
the houthis the economy is a mess the
houthis have shown to be abysmal
managers of the economy so one aspect
here that we do have to keep in mind is
that they're probably trying to mobilize
prop Palestinian feeling within the yeni
population that is under their control
but also in parts of the country that
they don't control that has to be an
objective but beyond the domestic
element there's also significantly a
regional a regional element having won
the Civil War in Yemen the houthis feel
very much emboldened and they want to
establish themselves as a regional power
and we see that in their relations with
Saudi Arabia and the UAE we see that in
them uh sending missiles and drone
attacks on Israel and also now on the
Red Sea so ultimately I think we have to
combine both the regional and the
domestic um element okay we're going to
dig into that with James and by the way
in this conversation we're going to
pingpong obviously between the effects
on trade and the the regional implic
ation because because obviously these
two are connected it's the hou's ability
to strangle the trade in the Red Sea
which is such an important Waterway as
we as we laid out at the top of the show
which gives them this importance
regionally and which could have Regional
consequences and that my question that
James is my question to you with this
us-led Coalition now in in the Red Sea
um it already was you know the US fifth
fleet was is based in Bahrain so they
were around there but we moving now
closer to a regional
War I'm not sure about that but I think
um we'll have to U have to watch it very
carefully in the months to come um but
this uh International Maritime
cooperation uh is interesting it's not
the first time we've seen it in the Gulf
of Aiden in the past of course we had
the operations against Somali pirates uh
which turned out to be successful in the
end there was the European operation at
Atlanta the Chinese joined in and in a
pretty significant way uh and I suspect
and I hear that Outreach at the moment
is going to not only European countries
and Gulf countries but also to China
which has a big interest in calming down
things in the Red Sea given the enormous
trade that flows through there to
European markets and vice versa so the
strong interest coming from a lot of
different parts of the area should also
mention Egypt of course which is uh
risks losing major much needed foreign
exchange revenues from the SE Canal uh
so long as ships are being um sent
around the Cape of Good Hope so a
coalition of Interest here is is pretty
strong uh against the actions that the
hooes have taken the exception of course
is Iran Iran being a big supporter of
the hotis the main arm supplier to the
hotis and also with an interest probably
in uh spurring destabilization in the
region given its position uh Visa Israel
and so on but the overwhelming interest
seems to me to be a common one and I
think we're going to see quite a lot of
action there not just from the west but
also maybe from the Asian side too you
mentioned Iran what is the level of
involvement that they have in houthi
operations specifically in the houthi
you know putting so much military
pressure on this uh shipping
Lane yeah I mean there certainly been an
important factor militarily but um we
shouldn't imagine the hooes are uh the
creatures of Iran uh the hotis have
their own agenda uh for reasons also
well laid out by your previous speaker
there domestically they're very keen to
consolidate their position with the
population at home uh and whatever that
takes um and the Arians are in an
alliance with them yes there is the Shia
connection between the two although
they're very different branches of the
Shia Muslim faith uh so that shouldn't
be overdone either um so yes I mean
there is um there is a common interest
with Iran but Iran doesn't necessarily
control what the hoo is do okay you say
there's a convergence of Interest this
next question goes to saos if there's a
convergence of Interest so many people
and this makes intuitive sense so many
countries um have an interest in this
Waterway remaining safe and shielded
from houthi attacks and that's why uh
the US has set up this multinational
force is it possible is it possible to
Shield their given that there are 20,000
ships that pass through this um uh the
this Naval Corridor every year is it
possible to Shield them from houthi
attacks with the with the Coalition as
it's been set
up that's a you know that's a that's an
operational question for the military
people and to be honest I'm not having
that kind of background I'll try to to
answer from previous experience as James
I think mentioned earlier on we did
learn some lessons on that from the
anti-piracy efforts though exactly
that's where I was going you know we we
had the operation the NATO Shields down
there when they managed to tackle the
the piracy in Somalia and it was a very
successful operation I have to say and I
think that that's you know a lesson that
we can get from the overall operation
that's like you know if the countries
come together and they have a common
Target uh they can achieve that so I I
don't know how operationally H is and or
the emn is are and how capable they are
but I'm thinking that if you know
countries like the US the UK Spain and
also China as we heard earlier on that
has joined in the past that kind of
attempt and you know Chinese government
has mentioned several times that on its
interest to maintain all the arteries
open for global trade because as we know
um China has the nickname of the global
Factory so they really want to be able
to send all their goods uh around the
globe so I think it's in the interest of
most of the countries around the globe
so that's why they're going to put a lot
of effort I think to maintain the artery
open and you know we have also to
consider an equation that Panama Canal
has a lot of issues at the moment
because of the global warming and a lot
of goods cannot be SE from that route so
that is also increasing further the
importance of the Su canal and the
transportation of the goods through the
Su Canal to Tom your view on this is is
this operation doable is it possible
with a few no not just a few with US
Naval assets French Naval assets there
are 10 countries in this Coalition is
this possible to essentially make this
Waterway safe enough for all those ships
to decide to reroot their traffic
through there given that more than 12
companies so far have said we're we're
not we're not sailing through this
Waterway
anymore it's going to be very difficult
uh and and part of the uh answer to that
question is going to depend on what are
the rules of engagement uh which are
still not completely clear a lot of
detail is yet to be announced is it
going to be purely defensive or are
American assets and the region ships in
the Red Sea going to retaliate uh
against houthi assets against houthi
surveillance radar missile launch uh who
the port installations on the Red Sea
Coast we don't really know that yet uh
the Americans have been cautious in in
not committing to directly hit uh houthi
assets that would be complicated um the
houthis feel very emboldened right now
they feel borderline cubistic I think um
because they do perceive that they are
unchallenged inside Yemen which is uh
probably an accurate assessment as they
have been able to push back against
Saudi Arabia now they are negotiating
with Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia's
withdrawal from Yemen it's not a peace
process right it's a negotiation of the
houthi victory so right now the houthis
feel that they really have the bigger
end of the stick so can a maritime
mission in the Red Sea help to protect
some of the ships uh by air defense
mechanisms and so on yes but will it be
enough to convince as you said the many
companies that are as we speak more and
more of them announcing that they will
not Transit through the red Red Sea
that's difficult and I'm as of now I'm
I'm not convinced that it's going to
fully work I certainly hope so but it's
it's going to be a a major Challenge and
and by the way something and again this
is this question is operational in
nature um to my if you want to address
it go ahead James if you have thoughts
as well go ahead and and if this is a
detail then we can move on but the um
Western Country specifically France has
mentioned look they are sending they
meaning the houthis they're using shahad
drones which cost about 20 $330,000
they're very cheap and we're shooting
them down with missiles that are worth
about a million Euros so this raises
question of whether this Western
Coalition is sustainable as it's
presently constructed the way in which
these Western countries intend to
protect this Waterway if they're
hemorrhaging millions of dollars of
Euros in missiles when Yemen will be
able to launch these really inexpensive
drones is that something that the
Western countries can sustain um perhaps
James yeah it's interesting uh to think
back a few years to operation at Atlanta
it was a different um schema um in the
end it was successful not only because
of um countering the attacks by the
Somali pirate boats the skips that came
in and threatened the container and oil
traffic going through but also because
it was decided to hit the um the pirate
installations on the Somali Coast it
took a long time for that operation to
happen but when it did it was probably
the major factor in stopping uh the
piracy coming out of Somalia uh in a
different context here but nevertheless
I think probably the same sort of
inflection point is probably going to be
reached at some juncture uh when uh any
International maritime
protection force is going to have to
decide whether or not it takes on the
missile launching sites on
land of the hoo of course should that
happen there are dangers there because
you risk getting involved in the yemeni
what's left of the Yemen Civil War now
the huis may have won for the moment but
they haven't yet Consolidated their
position and there is a danger they are
getting dragged into yet another civil
conflict within Yemen so this is a very
difficult uh uh thing to achieve and I
suspect there will be a lot of head
scratching in military planning um
places in Washington and elsewhere as to
when and if that should happen in other
words attacks on land against the hotis
if they continue with their current
policy however let's not forget at the
end of the day the hoo is justify all of
this uh because they want to support the
Palestinian cause anybody that's been to
Yemen knows just how strong the feelings
are about that if the Gaza War comes to
an end that Also may have an effect on
the hooi strategy you raised a very
interesting point there you rais a very
interesting point which is as you say
that the the houthis are doing this in
the name in support officially of
Palestinians in Gaza um do you think
that what they're doing in the Red Sea
right now by by putting this military
pressure on this Waterway do you think
that can actually move the needle in the
Israel Gaza War it hasn't so far I doubt
it frankly I I don't think it's going to
be a
a major factor in changing the positions
of the principal players certainly not
the Israelis and I doubt the Americans
in that war um so um I don't think there
will
be a direct effect on on that that will
depend on other things but should the
Gaza War come to an end should we move
on to the next stage whatever that may
be um then uh the hotis May well um dial
down their actions because uh they're
they're kind of left high and dry so to
speak in terms of what they're trying to
do stav Ros what would it take for the
major shipping companies to give the
green light to go back through the Red
Sea because at least 12 of them as as of
the time of recording of this show have
pulled out of this route and they're
rerouting what would it take is there a
benchmark where they say for them it's a
business decision right they need to
make sure it's safe enough to be able to
send all their
goods correct and and you said exactly
what is all all about what is driving
the decision is it's businesses and also
we have to they have to balance between
risk and profitability so they have to
find out is it worth it to pass through
the Red Sea at the moment or should they
be more secure and spend a bit of more
time uh stretch a bit of more of my
assets and my capabilities so I can have
a safe uh passage navigation and I think
that's a question that the each
individual company has to take because
as you know each company has different
business strategies and different uh
business cultures So based on their own
uh ideas and beliefs they're going to
move
forwards Toma as you watch all of this
unfold we're in a we're a what may be an
inflection point here right the US is
just uh bringing together this
International Coalition to try and
secure this Waterway as you watch this
unfold we don't know yet exactly where
this goes How This Ends what are you
going to be watching out for what
signals are you interested in
I will be watching for the Rules of
Engagement in more detail as I mentioned
a few minutes ago for the Coalition and
what that implies for uh POS possible
retaliation against directly against
hthi assets inside Yemen it's not clear
to me if the US wants to do that for
fear of escalation H in the Red Sea and
Beyond with the houthis and perhaps with
other armed groups that Iran backs
throughout the region but also for fear
of houthi retaliation I mean right now
there's a very delicate balancing act
that is being being played in those
political talks between Saudi Arabia and
the houthis they have been going on for
a long time now more than a year there
have been rumors of an imminent deal
between Saudi Arabia and the houthis for
a long time now it keeps on getting
pushed back one of the reasons why it
keeps on getting pushed back is that the
houthis again perceive that they have
the big end of the stick and that they
are consistently asking for more trying
to extract more concessions for Saudi
Arabia so this might also be part of the
houthi calculus here to try to extract
more concessions to legitimate to
consolidate and to institutionalize
their domination of what they want to be
uh now a a phase of post war at Yemen so
if the US retaliates and hits houthi
assets radar sites surveillance sites
Port installations on the Red Sea Coast
uh that may be in a way the best way to
establish and narrow terms a deterrence
in the Red Sea which is probably
necessary to reopen it to shipping but
the risk in doing that is that the
houthis would retaliate not necessarily
only against the us but possibly also
against Saudi Arabia or the UAE or other
countries in the region um which would
throw off potentially other political uh
Dynamics at play notably those Saudi
houthi talks so this is a very difficult
equation for the us to try to figure out
to try to strike the right balance um
because actions that may be necessary on
one front may cause damage on another
front so I'm I'm not sure what the the
right way out for the US is here James
if we gameplay this what do you think
are the realistic scenarios I mean one
one that we've kind of put out there um
is well perhaps this this multinational
Naval Force actually neutralizes the
houthi threat uh to this Waterway I
suppose that's one positive scenario
what do you think are the other
realistic
ones I think there's a fair chance that
the deterrent effect of that
multinational Force particularly if it's
not just Western countries uh but if the
gulf I think the gulf probably would be
very supportive whether it will join in
materially I don't know
and ex for bahin bahin is the only Arab
country in they hav't yet except for
bahin and you would have expected that
given this the base of the US Fleet but
um uh also important as I said before is
China and to some extent Japan and some
of the Asian countries if they join in
to I think that would be um there a
massive deterrent not only to the hotis
but also to the Iranians don't forget
the Iranian relationship with China
plays in the background here as well and
it might just be successful without
having to launch major attacks on the um
mainland of Yemen uh certainly one would
hope for that um
realistic H perhaps um but um maybe
one's hoping for too much here but there
is this danger that if uh the
multinational Force whatever it's called
does get dragged into further civil
conflict on the Arabian Peninsula that
could be pretty dangerous for all people
all concerned and we shouldn't exclude
that and we don't have much time left in
the show but can I get you to address
quickly something that Tuma has said
several times that the houthis may have
an eye not just on the uh Israel Gaza
War but also on their peace deal that
they're currently negotiating uh with
the Saudis and this may help them put
pressure on the Saudis your your views
on
that I think up to a point that might
might work um but uh I'm not sure it
will it'll make their situation that
much better there is a bit of hubis
somebody mentioned hubis earlier amongst
the hooes at the moment there there is a
danger that they're overreaching here uh
they have a strong interest to calm
things down with Saudi Arabia uh they
don't want to get uh back into the sort
of situation they were in three or four
years ago uh and if they do their own
position domestically will be
tremendously weakened uh it's not that
Saudi Arabia necessarily will re-enter a
Civil War in Yen but they have to be
very careful about that in what they're
calculating so I think so far but no
further perhaps could be the principle
uh here if the hoo is are trying to do
that Visa leverage on the Saudis okay
well we'll leave it at that that
completes the regional picture of this
conversation thank you so much to all of
you gentlemen too James Moran stavos
Karen Peres thank you for joining us
today and for taking the time thank you
for watching you can see the program
again anytime by visiting our website
al.com and for further discussion go to
our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insid story you can also
join the conversation on X AJ
insidestory is our handle from me serl
vaner and the whole team here in Doha
bye for
[Music]
now